Brandon Johnson                          Department of Police • City of Chicago                    Officer-6
Mayor                                    Location-South • Chicago, Illinois 60653      Interim Superintendent of Police

May 26, 2023

Administrator-B
Chief Administrator
Civilian Office of Police Accountability
Location-East, 4th Floor
Chicago, IL 60622

RE: Request for additional investigation pursuant to MCC 2-78-130-a-i-(2)
Log-001

Request for additional investigation for:
Officer-1

Dear Chief Administrator:

The Chicago Police Department (CPD) has reviewed the above referenced investigation and has
concerns that may require additional investigation. This letter describes the additional consideration this
investigation requires.

I. Officer-1 was not acting in the course of his employment when he allegedly murdered
and his conduct is properly described as a violation of Department Rule 1, violation of a law,
which occurred when Officer-1 committed First Degree Murder, 720 ILCS 5/9-1 rather than an unlawful use
of force.

The allegations sustained in COPA's investigation describe Officer-1 as violating Department Rules
for engaging in an unjustified shooting related to his job as a police officer. These allegations do not properly
describe the event that took place.

Officer-1 was arrested and charged by Chicago Police Detectives following an investigation into the murder
of (Officer-1's [REDACTED]) conducted under Case-001. [REDACTED]'s death was not an
"officer-involved death" as described under Illinois Law because Officer-1 was not acting within the scope of his
employment when he killed [REDACTED]. Under the City of Chicago Municipal Code, COPA has the authority to
conduct administrative investigations into possible rule violations for all incidents involving a firearm discharge
by a Department member using a preponderance of the evidence standard.2 However, all of the evidence used
in this case was obtained by Chicago Police Detectives who completed an investigation establishing probable
cause that Officer-1 murdered [REDACTED].

50 ILCS 727/1-5
2 2-78-120-c

Emergency and TTY: 9-1-1 • Non Emergency and TTY: (within city limits) 3-1-1 • Non Emergency and TTY: (outside city limits) (312) 746-6000
E-mail: police@cityofchicago.org • Website: www.cityofchicago.org/police

COPA's sustained allegation that Officer-1 "discharged a firearm at [REDACTED] without justification"
does not properly describe the event that took place. Detectives obtained evidence establishing that Officer-1 was
in a domestic relationship with [REDACTED], they were engaged in an argument and Officer-1 was the last
person in [REDACTED]'s residence before [REDACTED]'s body was discovered. There is no evidence that Officer-1 claimed he shot
[REDACTED] as part of his duties as a Chicago Police Officer, let alone any claim that he had any justification to
shoot [REDACTED].

COPA's characterization of Officer-1's actions as those of an officer are contrary to the evidence in this
matter. Even by its own admission and consistent with sustained allegation 4 that Officer-1 "was absent from work
without permission", Officer-1 was not at work at the time that these actions occurred. The Department does not
challenge that COPA has jurisdiction of this matter, with the appropriate service needed as described below, and
could find a violation of Department Rule 1 by violating the law, when he murdered [REDACTED].3

II. Officer-1 cannot avoid providing a Garrity protected statement by invoking protections under
the Fifth Amendment.

The Department believes that Officer-1 was not properly provided his Administrative Rights and was not
properly ordered to give a statement. Once Officer-1 is properly presented with these allegations, his refusal to
provide a statement to questions related to his official duties would result in an additional allegation for
insubordination in violation of Department Rules 2, 3, 5, 6, and 51.

COPA's investigation showed that on 11 March 2022, COPA emailed Officer-1's attorney stating:
"I [COPA investigator] know that in previous communications it was conveyed that Officer-1
invoked his right to remain silent. Is that still the case for both Log-001 and Log-002?"

Officer-1's attorney responded by email:
"As we discussed Officer-1 is currently incarcerated in the Cook County Department of Corrections
under indictment for First Degree Murder. We will decline to participate in an administrative statement
as per the CBA criminal prosecution is not 'probable' but is 'actual' and he is within his rights to invoke
his right to remain silent under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution."

The allegations referenced in the email were not included in COPA's case attachments and it is not clear
if Officer-1 was served with his statutory Administrative Proceeding Rights (CPD-44.105). The Department does
not believe Officer-1 has a constitutional right to refuse to give an administrative statement concerning disciplinary
charges related to his employment, once he is properly ordered to do so.

In Satchell v. Board of Commissioners of Melrose Park, the Illinois appellate court held a police officer
was properly charged and terminated for insubordination (and other charges) when he asserted his 5th
Amendment right to not testify after he was properly given Garrity warnings and ordered to testify.4 Here, an
officer was hunting while on sick leave and was ordered to answer questions related to another person, a felon

3 It should also be noted that COPA has companion case to this log which sustains allegation of domestic abuse against Officer-1,
Log-002, which has been separately referred to the Department of Law for separation.
4 Satchell v. Board of Police and Fire Commissioners of the Village of Melrose Park, 2022 IL App(1st) 201361

using a firearm. During the investigation, the officer was provided with administrative rights ordering him to
answer questions and informing him his statement would not be disclosed in any criminal investigation or
proceeding. The officer answered the questions.5 At a hearing before the Board, the officer's attorney told the
Board the officer would not testify and invoked his 5th Amendment right because the officer's answers could
incriminate him.6 The attorney was informed the officer was given the appropriate Garrity warning and was
ordered by a superior to testify. The officer refused, asserting the 5th Amendment. The court provided an
extensive review of Garrity, holding "Garrity is self-executing, attaching as a matter of law when a police
officer is ordered by his public employer to answer questions about his conduct that could incriminate him."7
The court upheld the Board's decision to charge and terminate the officer for insubordination, stating:

"[The officer] was represented by counsel [and]...could not possibly complain that he was
caught off-guard or unaware of the issue, even if his lawyer's stated understanding of Garrity
was incorrect. Simply put, [the officer] was not given the choice between keeping his job
or making statements that could be used against him in a criminal prosecution...He was
given the choice between truthfully answering questions while enjoying immunity from the use
of his answers...versus refusing to testify (even though given immunity) and facing the job-
related consequences for doing so...He chose the latter."8

In Confederation of Police v. Conlisk, the 7th Circuit reversed the termination of officers as
unconstitutional after the officers invoked the 5th Amendment before a federal grand jury.9 The court noted that
during the internal investigation, the officers were not asked "specific, narrow questions related to their official
duties," instead they were only asked if they invoked their 5th Amendment right at the grand jury. The court
also noted "the officers were not advised that their answers would not be used against them in criminal
proceedings."10 The court explained the Department investigators did not need special authority to grant
immunity because the Supreme Court already prohibited the use of statements made by officers who were under
threat of dismissal.

Chicago Police Department Form 44.105 provides administrative rights to members, including "any
admission or statement made by you during the course of this hearing, interrogation or examination and the
fruits thereof cannot be used against you in a subsequent criminal proceeding." When an officer is advised a
statement cannot be used in a criminal proceeding and is properly ordered by a superior to give a statement, the
officer cannot use the 5th Amendment to avoid job-related consequences for refusing to truthfully answer
specific, narrow questions related to their official duties.

5 Id. at 1112
6 Id. at ¶2
7 Id. at ¶80
8 Id. at ¶82-83
9 Confederation of Police v. Conlisk, 489 F.2d 891, 895 (7th Cir 1973)
10 Id at 895 (emphasis added)

The Department appreciates that these are complicated issues for a case involving an extremely unique
situation and looks forward to discussing any issues or concerns with COPA.

Sincerely,

Officer-6
Interim Superintendent of Police
Chicago Police Department
