NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
Vehicle Recorder Division
Washington, D.C. 20594
March 14, 2020
Global Positioning System Device
Specialist's Factual Report
By Specialist-1
1. EVENT SUMMARY
Location: Location-1, Region-West
Date: March 24, 2019
Aircraft: Cessna 172M
Registration: N-XXXX
Operator: Airline-A
NTSB Number: CASE-ANON-001
On March 24, 2019, about 1815 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 172M airplane,
N-XXXX, impacted mountainous terrain near Location-1, Region-West while on a
cross-country flight to Airport-Bravo, Location-3, Region-West. The
commercial pilot and his non pilot-rated passenger received fatal injuries, and the airplane
was destroyed. The airplane was registered to Airline-A, and
was being operated as a 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
Undetermined night meteorological conditions existed at the impact location at the time
of the accident. The accident flight leg had originated from Airport-Alpha,
Location-2, Region-West.
2. GROUP
A group was not convened.
3. DETAILS OF INVESTIGATION
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Vehicle Recorder Division received
the following Global Positioning System (GPS) Device:
Device Manufacturer/Model: Garmin Aera 660
Serial Number: 4NN007572
3.1. Device Description
Garmin Aera 660 is a battery-powered portable multi-function display and GPS receiver
with a sunlight readable 5-inch diagonal touchscreen operation display. The unit includes
a built-in Jeppesen database and can receive XM satellite radio for flight information
CASE-ANON-001
Global Positioning System Device Factual Report, Page 1

including NEXRAD radar, lightning, METARs, TAFs, and TFRs. The unit can also perform
and store weight and balance calculations. A built-in AOPA Airport Directory and Safe
Taxi Airport Diagrams are included for selected fields. The unit stores date, route-of-flight,
and flight-time information for up to 50 flights. The unit has 23 different map ranges
available, from 200 feet to 800 nm. A flight record is triggered when groundspeed exceeds
30 knots and altitude exceeds 250 feet and ends when groundspeed drops below 30
knots for 10 minutes or more. A detailed track log - including latitude, longitude, date,
time, and GPS altitude information for an unspecified number of points - is stored within
the unit whenever the receiver has a lock on the GPS navigation signal. Position is
updated within the track log as a function of time or distance moved, depending on how
the unit has been configured. Once the current track log memory becomes full, new
information either overwrites the oldest information or recording stops, depending on how
the unit is configured. The current track log can be saved to long-term memory and 15
saved track logs can be maintained in addition to the current track log. Track log storage
may be activated or de-activated at user discretion. All recorded data is stored in non-
volatile memory (NVM). The unit contains hardware and software permitting the
download of recorded waypoint, route, and track log information to a PC via a built-in USB
port. An internal button-battery is used to provide back-up power to the internal memory
and real-time clock during those periods when main power is removed.
3.2. Data Recovery
Upon arrival at the Vehicle Recorder Division, an exterior examination revealed the device
was severely damaged as shown in Figure 1. The device would not power on and was
disassembled for further examination.
The Garmin Aera 660 stores recorded data on an eMMC FLASH memory device
mounted to the main printed circuit board (PCB), as shown in Figure 2. The memory
device was removed from the PCB using a hot air re-work station. A binary raw-data
readout of the device was obtained using an eMMC Reader. This raw-data file was
decoded using a software program in the laboratory. The converted data contained
around 80 flight sessions, however, none of them was relevant to the accident. Thus, no
accident related data were recovered from the device.
CASE-ANON-001
Global Positioning System Device Factual Report, Page 2

Figure 1: Front and back of Garmin Aera 660 as received.
Figure 2: The Garmin Aera 660 main circuit board and chipped-off flash memory.
CASE-ANON-001
Global Positioning System Device Factual Report, Page 3