Airline-A Corona base Operational Procedures
Dear pilots,
we would like to welcome you at our Airport-Charlie base. We would like to familiarize you with our
base and company's recommendations and operational procedures for safety of your flights in
California and the surrounding states.

Airline-A is located at Airport-Charlie, east of the city of Los Angeles.
Surrounded by controlled tower airports such as Chino, Riverside, Ontario, etc.

Airport-Charlie is a great place to start your flight training or do your time-building.
The training area is within 15 NM radius from the base, so you do not have to fly far away to
practice maneuvers, instrument approaches, and takeoffs or landings.

Airport-Charlie has 3200 X 60 feet runway lengths and 24 hours self serve fuel service.

Please take a look on following tips to ensure smooth operations:
1. Airport-Charlie is a small and non-towered airport, always watch around prior starting
engine, taxiing and prior entering runway. There might be people operating without using
a radio.
Always announce your intentions on Airport-Charlie traffic at 122.7 Mhz.
2. Taxi slowly, there are multiple airplanes around you and sometimes even people walking
around them.
3. Do not do any runup at parking spot, there are airplanes around and behind you.
4. Prior any flight contact a weather briefer at +1 (800) 992-7433.

5. For after hours briefing or flights use briefing room, ramp entrance code is [REDACTED].
Make sure you lock the room after use.
6. Airport gate is closed for entrance from every day. The gate will open
automatically for you to exit the airport after closing hours.
7. Shall you need oil, ask dispatcher for a full bottle. If you need oil at other locations check
with local FBO's or fuel providers. Oil type used by specific airplane is printed on the
dispatch. Do not mix oil types.
8. After sampling the fuel before flight at Airport-Charlie, if the fuel sample does not have any
contamination return it to the tank. If there is a contamination throw the sample into the
provided bucket and contact dispatcher / mechanic. Please do not spill fuel on the
ground, it damages the tarmac surface.
9. Stay away from LAX Class-B airspace. First time you need to fly with CFI and receive a
checkout from school to go to class B. It is extremely busy and complicated airspace.
10. Bear in mind that Catalina island KAVX and Airport-Echo are NO-GO airports for solo
flights, only specially approved and checked pilots can fly there with our airplanes. Talk
to your instructor about checkout procedures.
11. Anytime you plan to fly over the water you need to have a life jacket onboard for each
pilot and passenger, life jackets must be placed in seat pockets so they are available
during the flight. Do not put them in baggage area. Shall you need them ask dispatcher
for a life jacket before the flight.
12. Do not plan flights with legs longer than 4 hrs for C172 and 3 hrs for C152 (HOBBS)
latest by this time you must land, have a rest, check fuel remaining and oil.
13. All airplanes are equipped with GPS use it smartly to plan your flight.
14. You need to carry a paper version of Sectional chart for any flight or have an ipad with
Foreflight and downloaded pdf with official FAA version of the sectional chart.
15. Do not play with ELT remote switch, if it happens to you to accidentally activate an ELT
during the flight or on the ground, please contact nearest towered airport tower and
announce it to them or call school dispatcher.
16. If there is any technical problem or observation with the airplane contact school
dispatcher for assistance, where possible take a picture or video of the problem and
send it to dispatcher.
17. In summer months weather in California could be extremely hot, make sure that you
have water with you for the flight. Make sure that you calculate density altitude. If you
see large forest fire, do not fly through the smoke it is not safe.
18. Do not fly over open desert areas, they are complicated for VFR navigation, where
possible stick to the highway or railroad.
19. There are three major military airports in the area: Airport-Foxtrot AFB, Edwards
AFB and Vandenberg AFB. These airports are closed for civilian traffic and surrounded
by restricted areas. Do not try to get close.
20. There are high mountains north of the Ontario airport, if you want to fly to Location-3 area,
follow highway 15 and use Cajon pass to cross them. This is the easiest option. Do not fly
over mountains without a purpose, terrain there is high and usually with plenty of birds
around.
21. Mexico is absolutely a NO-GO zone for any flights.
22. After your flight make sure gust lock, pitot cover are put in place together with chocks
and tie down chains.
23. Do not leave any trash inside of the airplane.
24. Do not walk on the grass located outside of the briefing room.
25. Smoking is prohibited on the ramp area.
- - AIRLINE-A MANAGEMENT - -