I, CFI-1 CFI 11/20, conducted the Aircraft Checkout for Pilot-1,
Commercial Pilot, to rent a C172 at Airline-A in Location-4 for the purpose of
time-building in the Southern California area on February 28th, 2019.

The first hour and a half I spent with Pilot-1 we did Ground School going over everything
listed in the FAA's Conducting an Effective Flight Review guide. We covered all the topics in
the regulatory review guide discussing PAVE (Pilot / Aircraft / EnVironment / External
Pressures). I was overall impressed with his level of Aeronautical Knowledge and focus on
safety. Of all the Country-A time-building students I personally checked out at Airline-A in
Location-4, Pilot-1 had the most fluent English and most knowledge about flying in America.

Since Pilot-1 did all of his flight training in Location-15, Region-Southeast I focused heavily on how to navigate and
fly around the Southern California area I spent most of my 1200 hours flying around. I told him
the proper paths to take West from Location-4 into Los Angeles, South towards San Diego, North
towards Victorville through the Cajon Pass and East towards Location-5 through the Banning
Pass. I warned him about both of these mountain passes, Cajon and Banning, that the winds
can become very strong as the two mountain ranges will both form a wind funnel. We did not
discuss any flight plan into Location-3 - his destination at the time of the accident. He flew his
own way to Location-3 and back several times after my Checkout before his accident. I was not
at the airport and had no knowledge of him renting the plane to fly to Location-3 the day of his
accident.

The second hour and a half I spent with Pilot-1 we flew out of Airport-Charlie eastbound into the
Lake Matthews Practice Area where I had him perform Commercial Maneuvers, Stalls, and all of
the Emergency Operations. I then had Pilot-1 navigate north of Lake Matthews to Airport-Hotel
to test his Towered Airport Operations and finally had him navigate back to land at Airport-Charlie
for Untowered Airport Operations.

To me, Pilot-1 was a very competent pilot and was indeed at the Commercial Pilot level his
Designated Pilot Examiner found him at on February 23rd 2019.