CIVILIAN OFFICE OF POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY LOG #2021-0004893
COPA finds ample factual support in the record to conclude by a preponderance of the evidence
that Officer Tyler discharged his firearm at Ms. without justification.
Specifically, the evidence shows that that Ms. died of a single gunshot wound to
the head and that Officer Tyler was the last person to see her alive. In addition, Officer Tyler’s left
hand tested positive for gunshot residue, indicating that he fired, or was at least in close proximity
to a discharged firearm. Importantly, the investigation uncovered that the fired cartridge casing
recovered from a shoe tray near Ms. body and the fired cartridge casing recovered from
Officer Tyler’s bag found inside his residence had been fired from the same firearm. Although the
firearm has never been found, the evidence supports the conclusion that Officer Tyler shot Ms.
with the firearm, which he then removed from her residence and hid or discarded.
Specifically, Officer Tyler was observed on surveillance footage leaving Ms. apartment
with a firearm and he reported that he had left a Springfield Armory 9mm handgun on the top shelf
of Ms. bedroom closet. This handgun has never been found. COPA finds it more likely
than not that Officer Tyler used the firearm he had at Ms. residence to shoot Ms.
and then disposed of the firearm.
There is also compelling evidence showing that Officer Tyler removed Ms. cell
phone from her residence and possibly discarded it at an unspecified location near the 015th District
Station. Specifically, cell phone data indicated that the cell phones belonging to Officer Tyler and
Ms. were together from 9:15 pm as they simultaneously travelled from Ms.
residence to an unspecified location near the 015th District Station, where Ms. cell
phone ceased transmitting to nearby cell towers at approximately 9:49 pm.
There is no evidence that anyone other than Officer Tyler was involved. No one other than
Officer Tyler entered or exited Ms. apartment between the time she was last seen alive
on surveillance cameras and when her body was discovered by the responding officers. Although
Officer Tyler reported last seeing Ms. at 4:30 pm on December 8, 2021, security footage
from her apartment complex showed that Officer Tyler did not leave Ms. apartment
until 9:06 pm that evening. Officer Tyler was alone when he left her residence and Ms.
was not seen leaving her residence. Ms. was found shot dead the next day.
Furthermore, the evidence Officer Tyler attempted to cover up his involvement in Ms.
death also supports a finding that he discharged his firearm at Ms. without
justification. Officer Tyler initially reported that he last saw her at approximately 4:30 p.m. on
December 8 although video evidence showed him leaving at approximately 9:00 p.m. that day.47
He also reported that he had left a firearm in her residence, which was not found in her locked
apartment the day her death was discovered. It also appears that Officer Tyler called Ms.
phone after he left her residence, but cell phone tower records showed that his own phone was in
the same location as Ms. at the time. Taken together, it is reasonable to infer that Officer
Tyler sought to mislead the police about key facts related to the incident.
App. 3d 385, 387 (3d Dist. 1993) (holding that the Police Board did not err in terminating police officer’s employment
where it had found that the police officer had engaged in criminal conduct).
47 Cf. People v. Balfour, 2015 IL App (1st) 122325, ¶ 60, 30 N.E.3d 1141 (upholding murder conviction in part based
on evidence that defendant lied about his whereabouts on the date of the murder).
8

