CIVILIAN OFFICE OF POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY LOG #2021-0004893
of human life and the safety of all persons involved.42 Department members are only authorized
to use force that is objectively reasonable, necessary, and proportional, under the totality of the
circumstances, to ensure the safety of a member or a third person, stop an attack, make an arrest,
control a subject, or prevent escape.'" The primary concern in assessing the use of force is whether
the amount of force the officer used was objectively reasonable in light of the totality of the
circumstances faced by the officer.44 Factors to be considered by the officer may include, but are
not limited to: (1) whether the person is posing an imminent threat to the officer or others; (2) the
risk of harm, level of threat or resistance presented by the person; (3) the person's proximity to or
access to weapons; (4) whether de-escalation techniques can be employed or would be effective;
and (5) the availability of other resources.45
The use of deadly force is permitted only as a "last resort" when "necessary to protect
against an imminent threat to life or to prevent great bodily harm to the member or another
person."46 A Department member may use deadly force in only two situations: (1) to prevent
"death or great bodily harm from an imminent threat posed to the sworn member or to another
person"; (2) to prevent "an arrest from being defeated by resistance or escape, where the person to
be arrested poses an imminent threat of death or great bodily harm to a sworn member or another
person unless arrested without delay."47 A threat is considered imminent "when it is objectively
reasonable to believe that: (1) the person's actions are immediately likely to cause death or great
bodily harm to the member or others unless action is taken; and (2) the person has the means or
instruments to cause death or great bodily harm; and (3) the person has the opportunity and ability
to cause death or great bodily harm."'"
b. Standard of Proof
For each Allegation, COPA must make one of the following fmdings:
1. Sustained - where it is determined the allegation is supported by a preponderance of the evidence;
2. Not Sustained - where it is determined there is insufficient evidence to prove the allegations
by a preponderance of the evidence;
3. Unfounded - where it is determined by clear and convincing evidence that an allegation is false
or not factual; or
4. Exonerated - where it is determined by clear and convincing evidence that the conduct
described in the allegation occurred, but it is lawful and proper.
42 G03-02 (II)(A).
43 G03-02 (III)(B).
4 G03-02 (III)(B)(1)
45 G03-02 (III)(B)(1)
46 G03-02 (IV)(C)
G03-02(IV)(C); 720 ILCS 5/7-5
48 G03-02(IV)(B) (emphasis added)
7

