CIVILIAN OFFICE OF POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY LOG #2021-0004893
Specifically, the evidence shows that that died of a single gunshot wound to
the head and that Officer Tyler was the last person to see her alive. In addition, Officer Tyler's left
hand tested positive for gunshot residue, indicating that he fired, or was at least in close proximity
to a discharged firearm. Importantly, the investigation uncovered that the fired cartridge casing
recovered from a shoe tray near body and the fired cartridge casing recovered from
Officer Tyler's bag found inside his residence had been fired from the same firearm. Although the
firearm has never been found, the evidence supports the conclusion that Officer Tyler shot
with the firearm, which he then removed from her residence and hid or discarded.
Specifically, Officer Tyler was observed on surveillance footage leaving apartment
with a firearm and he reported that he had left a Springfield Armory 9mm handgun on the top shelf
of bedroom closet. This handgun has never been found. COPA finds it more likely
than not that Officer Tyler used the firearm he had at residence to shoot
and then disposed of the firearm.
There is also compelling evidence showing that Officer Tyler likely removed
cell phone from her residence and discarded it at an unspecified location near the 015th
District Station. Specifically, cell phone data indicated that the cell phones belonging to Officer
Tyler and were together from 9:15 pm as they simultaneously travelled from
residence to an unspecified location near the 015th District Station, where
cell phone ceased transmitting to nearby cell towers at approximately 9:49 pm.
There is no evidence that anyone other than Officer Tyler was involved. No one other than
Officer Tyler entered or exited apartment between the time she was last seen alive
on surveillance cameras and when her body was discovered by the responding officers. Although
Officer Tyler reported last seeing at 4:30 pm on December 8, 2021, security footage
from her apartment complex showed that Officer Tyler did not leave apartment
until 9:06 pm that evening. Officer Tyler was alone when he left her residence and
was not seen leaving her residence. was found shot dead the next day.
Finally, the fact finder may draw an adverse inference from Officer Tyler's refusal to
answer the allegations in this case.'
The totality of the circumstances shows that Officer Tyler more likely than not discharged
his firearm at without justification in violation of Department policy. Allegation #1
is Sustained.
b. Allegation #2 that Officer Tyler failed to report that he discharged a firearm
is Sustained.
COPA finds by a preponderance of the evidence that Officer Tyler failed to report that he
discharged a firearm in violation of Department policy. Specifically, Department policy requires
any member who discharges their firearm to immediately notify OEMC of the discharge, provide
55 See Canter v. Cook Cty. Officers Electoral Bd., 170 Ill. App. 3d 364, 369-70 (1st Dist. 1988) ("[I]t is apparent that
the trier of fact in a civil case . . . is not barred from considering a witness' refusal to testify.").
9

