COPA's sustained allegation that Tyler "discharged a firearm at without justification"
does not properly describe the event that took place. Detectives obtained evidence establishing that Tyler was
in a domestic relationship with they were engaged in an argument and Tyler was the last
person in her residence before her body was discovered. There is no evidence that Tyler claimed he shot
as part of his duties as a Chicago Police Officer, let alone any claim that he had any justification to
shoot her.
COPA's characterization of Tyler's actions as those of an officer are contrary to the evidence in this
matter. Even by its own admission and consistent with sustained allegation 4 that Tyler "was absent from work
without permission", Tyler was not at work at the time that these actions occurred. The Department does not
challenge that COPA has jurisdiction of this matter, with the appropriate service needed as described below, and
could find a violation of Department Rule 1 by violating the law, when he murdered his ,
3
II. Officer Tyler cannot avoid providing a Garrity protected statement by invoking protections under
the Fifth Amendment.
The Department believes that Tyler was not properly provided his Administrative Rights and was not
properly ordered to give a statement. Once Tyler is properly presented with these allegations, his refusal to
provide a statement to questions related to his official duties would result in an additional allegation for
insubordination in violation of Department Rules 2, 3, 5, 6, and 51.
COPA's investigation showed that on 11 March 2022, COPA emailed Tyler's attorney stating:
"I [COPA investigator] know that in previous communications it was conveyed that PO Tyler Pierre
invoked his right to remain silent. Is that still the case for both Log #2021-4893 and Log #2021-0970?"
Tyler's attorney responded by email:
"As we discussed Officer Tyler is currently incarcerated in the Cook County Department of Corrections
under indictment for First Degree Murder. We will decline to participate in an administrative statement
as per the CBA criminal prosecution is not 'probable' but is 'actual' and he is within his rights to invoke
his right to remain silent under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution."
The allegations referenced in the email were not included in COPA's case attachments and it is not clear
if Tyler was served with his statutory Administrative Proceeding Rights (CPD-44.105). The Department does
not believe Tyler has a constitutional right to refuse to give an administrative statement concerning disciplinary
charges related to his employment, once he is properly ordered to do so.
In Satchell v. Board of Commissioners of Melrose Park, the Illinois appellate court held a police officer
was properly charged and terminated for insubordination (and other charges) when he asserted his 5th
Amendment right to not testify after he was properly given Garrity warnings and ordered to testify.4 Here, an
officer was hunting while on sick leave and was ordered to answer questions related to another person, a felon
3 It should also be noted that COPA has companion case to this log which sustains allegation of domestic abuse against Officer Tyler,
CR# 2021-970, which has been separately referred to the Department of Law for separation.
Satchell v. Board of Police and Fire Commissioners of the Village of Melrose Park, 2022 IL App(1") 201361

