using a firearm. During the investigation, the officer was provided with administrative rights ordering him to
answer questions and informing him his statement would not be disclosed in any criminal investigation or
proceeding. The officer answered the questions.' At a hearing before the Board, the officer's attorney told the
Board the officer would not testify and invoked his 5" Amendment right because the officer's answers could
incriminate him.' The attorney was informed the officer was given the appropriate Garrity warning and was
ordered by a superior to testify. The officer refused, asserting the 5" Amendment. The court provided an
extensive review of Garrity, holding "Garrity is self-executing, attaching as a matter of law when a police
officer is ordered by his public employer to answer questions about his conduct that could incriminate him."7
The court upheld the Board's decision to charge and terminate the officer for insubordination, stating:
"[The officer] was represented by counsel [and]...could not possibly complain that he was
caught off- guard or unaware of the issue, even if his lawyer's stated understanding of Garrity
was incorrect. Simply put, [the officer] was not given the choice between keeping his job
or making statements that could be used against him in a criminal prosecution...He was
given the choice between truthfully answering questions while enjoying immunity from the use
of his answers...versus refusing to testify (even though given immunity) and facing the job-
related consequences for doing so...He chose the latter."8
In Confederation of Police v. Conlisk, the 7" Circuit reversed the termination of officers as
unconstitutional after the officers invoked the 5' Amendment before a federal grand jury.9 The court noted that
during the internal investigation, the officers were not asked "specific, narrow questions related to their official
duties," instead they were only asked if they invoked their 5" Amendment right at the grand jury. The court
also noted "the officers were not advised that their answers would not be used against them in criminal
proceedings."1° The court explained the Department investigators did not need special authority to grant
immunity because the Supreme Court already prohibited the use of statements made by officers who were under
threat of dismissal.
Chicago Police Department Form 44.105 provides administrative rights to members, including "any
admission or statement made by you during the course of this hearing, interrogation or examination and the
fruits thereof cannot be used against you in a subsequent criminal proceeding." When an officer is advised a
statement cannot be used in a criminal proceeding and is properly ordered by a superior to give a statement, the
officer cannot use the 5" Amendment to avoid job-related consequences for refusing to truthfully answer
specific, narrow questions related to their official duties.
5 Id. at 1112
6 Id. at V 2
7 Id. at ¶80
8
Id. at ¶82-83
9 Confederation of Police v. Conlisk, 489 F.2d 891, 895 (7th Cir 1973)
10 Id at 895 (emphasis added)

The Department appreciates that these are complicated issues for a case involving an extremely unique
situation and looks forward to discussing any issues or concerns with COPA.
Sincerely,
Fred L. Waller
Interim Superintendent of Police
Chicago Police Department